Dear Argentines, what weeks and months have passed since April. I know perfectly all the things that they must be thinking and feeling, and I know them because I also feel it. That is why I am going to explain to you why we are going through what we are going through, why when we seemed to be doing well, we feel we are going backwards. And I am going to speak from the heart with the truth as I always did, and also with the conviction that if we continue forward we will achieve that Argentina that we dreamed a long, long time ago.
Do you remember that almost a year ago I convened, immediately after the midterm elections, the main leaders of the whole country, to commit ourselves to work together on three basic consensuses -as I called them- without which it is very difficult for us to grow? The first is to move towards a balance of public accounts because we can not spend more than we have, doing so leads us to have more inflation and ask for more borrowed money; the second is to put formal work, quality work, as the axis of our development path; and the third is to build a state without corruption. Everything that happened to us these days shows that these consensuses are more urgent than ever. That's why I want to renew my commitment and that of this valuable team that is Change of backing these consensus. And I invite once again the entire Argentine leadership, politics, justice, unions, civil society, to engage with them.
In these months all the storms were unleashed together, but that is not why we are going to lose hope, we must mature as a society and not continue to live beyond our possibilities, nor coexist more with corruption. The road to travel was always difficult and as in any difficult path there are advances and setbacks, it is not linear. We Argentines have had decades of recurring crises, permanent deficits, debt to cover, exchange rate instability, inflation, and ending this was going to take time. This could not be done from one moment to another, we had to change many things and make decisions that were unfriendly, disagreeable in a moment, even though they are always indispensable for the good of all. That is why what we did is to ask the world to support us in a gradual change, first to take care of the most vulnerable, beneficiaries of the Universal Assignment for the Son or those who receive social programs like We Do Future, all, all those who need more support.
And it is very positive, it is very positive that from the beginning and now more than ever the world supports us, and for two years the market also did it. What is happening to us now may have happened in January 2016, because we received a State that was still spending much more than what it collected, there were no reserves in the Central Bank, there were a lot of stocks and distortions in the economy. At that time there were no dollars to sustain the Argentine economy. But what happened? The euphoria that we generate with the change, that the change will win the elections and have slowed down the path that led us to be Venezuela, helped us to convince those who lent us the money to give us time to fix our structural problems in a few years. And for a long time we did well, the economy grew almost two years in a row, we lowered poverty and created hundreds of thousands of jobs.
We turned the situation of energy with much sacrifice and today thanks to Vaca Muerta and other investments soon we will have abundant energy that will generate a lot of work and dollars for the country. We also managed to start up industries such as renewables, tourism, knowledge industries, many sectors that mark us that we have a huge future. Transportation for Argentines became more accessible both by plane and by land. We did and continue to do infrastructure works in routes, ports, airports, freight trains, telecommunications, which are allowing us to connect this great and wonderful country that we have. And we gave a fundamental boost to the field, our great world-class industry, which responded with a record harvest before suffering this year's drought.
But after two years and a few months the situation changed and in large part for issues that are beyond our control. First we suffered the worst drought in more than half a century; and you also know that due to bad policies of the previous government, we currently import oil, and unfortunately the price of oil in the world increased, interest rates rose in the United States at the fastest pace in recent years, and China and the United States They started a commercial battle that hurt countries like ours. All these changes in the world we could not foresee and we are facing them in the best way. The set of these problems caused those who lent us money to get to the other side of the river, began to doubt, to doubt our ability to achieve what we set out to do. And when making decisions to face this new scenario, we took measures that generated some doubts, that we as a government have to clarify, and I am just here today doing it. We also generate other doubts as Argentines, because we were not able to show unity in our commitment to move forward with structural reforms; I mean that laws were passed that destroyed the approved budget, and that obviously generated a negative impact, an impact that increases the perception of risk in Argentina. And the dollar started to rise. In this situation we reacted quickly, we asked the International Monetary Fund for help and we obtained unprecedented support for any country in the history of the Fund, unprecedented, for the amount, the speed and for the conditions that we achieved. when we thought that all the doubts about our ability to cross over to the other side of the river had been cleared away, things happened that raised doubts again, one was the problems of Turkey, and especially in Brazil, and the other is the scandal of the notebooks that undoubtedly constitute a before and an after to end the corruption that so much poverty has brought us. But in the short term it affects the image of the country and generates more doubts about our ability to conduct ourselves with seriousness. But all this does nothing but confirm that until Argentina does not have its own budget, that it is a solid and independent country, we Argentines will be exposed to any external crisis. Knowing this scenario, we call the Fund and explain the new situation, and the Fund agreed to make a new plan. Today our team travels there to try to reach an agreement as soon as possible. We are seeing the technical details that are going to be ready in days and this will allow us to definitively clear any doubt about our financing in 2019. What we have to face is a basic problem that is not to spend more than what we have, and I believe that the Argentines, I believe that in all of us the awareness has grown that we can not continue to spend more than we have, live above our income, and much less coexist with corruption. We have to continue making all efforts to balance the accounts of the State, this is a process and in that process there are still many decisions to reach that balance. To cover what is missing during this transition, which has become an emergency, we are going to ask those who have more capacity to contribute, I mean those who export in Argentina, that their contribution is greater; Today Minister Dujovne is going to give you details on this point. We know that it is a bad, bad tax, that goes against what we want to encourage, that are more exports to generate more quality work in every corner of Argentina, but I have to ask them to understand that it is an emergency and we need to Your contribution. As for the government team, I have made the decision to reduce the number of ministries to less than half, governments have different moments and at different times different teams may be required. Given this moment that is ahead, I decided to compact more my team, to be able to give a more focused response in the agenda that is coming. With these changes that we are making in the team, with the measures that the Minister is going to announce and With the advances we are making with the Fund, we started to overcome the crisis, always taking care of those who need it the most, because we know that with this devaluation, poverty will increase and we will be there, for those most exposed be in this moment.That is why people who receive Universal Assignment for Child and other social programs will receive reinforcement in September and December, we will also strengthen food programs throughout the country to ensure availability of food in the dining rooms and in picnic. And from this month we will reinforce the Care Price program with special focus on food of the basic basket. This adds to what we are already doing to accompany thousands of families, we will continue pushing more and more The Market in your neighborhood that has been a success because it reaches cheaper products for people without intermediaries. And we will continue to take care of what our retirees pay for their medications; you know that PAMI members today save up to 14 percent compared to any other retiree from another social or prepaid work. We will also continue with the ANSES credits, supporting the Argentines who need a loan to continue improving their home or things they need. But we also know that these measures are never enough, but we are doing everything in our power to be able to cross this moment together, and when we go through it we will leave behind decades of sailing without direction, to settle for little, to fall and get up and fall again and again.
All these changes and measures that are going to be announced today have to do with listening, listening to those who think differently, listening to many people that I respect even though they are not in my Government, listening to everyone and everything they were feeling .
As far as the budget is concerned, we are making good progress with opposition leaders, because I remind you that we never had a majority in Congress: never. It is historic for a government to work with the opposition in the budget before being sent to Congress, and to have a budget agreed by an important part of the political leadership is to show that we understood that we have to get this backpack loaded from a State that spend a lot more than you have.
We know what the difficulties are and we are clear about what we should do; We know how we are going to grow. We are tired of living with fear, fear of not making ends meet, fear of the crooks, the corrupt; fear of what happens to the dollar; fear that the efforts we made will not work or do not reach. Believe me I know and I keep thinking about how to overcome them. I know they want a safe, predictable Argentina, with fewer ghosts and more solutions. That is why we are changing things at the root, without shortcuts, to resume as quickly as possible a path of growth, but not a short-term growth to win elections, but a permanent growth. We came to make a real change, that is why we were chosen by the Argentines, because they know that we are different from a past that they reject.
The blow we received in these five months is hard: the world told us again that we lived above our means. We believed with excessive optimism that it was possible to go organizing things little by little, but reality showed us that we have to go faster. For a long time, we Argentines could not become aware of the lack of alignment of our accounts and now we have to recognize it, assume it; It's up to us to be the generation that understands our problem, to be the generation that takes over. Are we easy? Of course it is not easy, nothing is easy, I would love for you to have everything you need. Do you think it makes me happy to tell this reality? Do you think it makes me happy not to give resources to the people who need it the most? Who can think that I would not want to pay all the university professors everything they ask for? Of course I would like to give more increase to the university professors, also to the nurses, to the police. I would love to have more budget for Science and Technology, where the future of the country is built; or move faster with the works of sewage, drinking water, routes, kindergartens that we promised. But our problem is that to start building the country we want and to do all those things and more, we have to balance our accounts; any development strategy needs to start there, with a state that spends less than it enters. Decades and decades dragging this same problem, always deceiving us, postponing this debate.
I feel that the time has come, that we are mature; We knew that this road was difficult, but it is the real road, it is long term, the one that tries to get out of the day-to-day logic and the conjuncture.
The change is a change of root, deep, really, not because we are enlightened people who believe we are right, but because we listen every day to Argentines who tell us that this has to be true. And let's not confuse ourselves, the failure in Argentina is that being one of the potentially richest countries in the world we have more than a third of the Argentines in poverty; it is a failure that in seventy years we can not solve our fiscal balance, and that we have been living the same amount of years with inflation, which means that we have to always be with our hearts in our mouths and with so many people without a job of Crisis quality there were many and we Argentines know it very well, but now we have a government that faces reality without hiding it, honestly, with an open head to talk with everyone, but at the same time without being afraid to pay the costs of taking charge of this reality and change it.
In this transformation that we undertook there are moments full of vigor and enthusiasm, but today we have to go through a difficult moment, so let's look at the film, not the photo. We have to solve our problems in a mature and responsible manner. And in that path of growth and development there is no magic tool, yes there are concrete ideas, realities, figures, projects. This time the change is true, because we have more and more a State that does things at the service of the people, at the service of the people and not of bad politics. We Argentines are understanding the situation, with the humility to accept the problems and the temperance to continue making the right effort.
We all have to give in to something if we want to move forward. The Argentines changed, Argentina changed. The latest events have allowed us to know how Argentina worked without values ​​that can not and will not return in any way; Even in the moments of most doubt the great majority have a voice that tells us "this has to go well", because this is a different moment to all of us who lived in the past, and it is different because we are being protagonists; It is different because this time it is with the truth on the table and without corruption.
I know that these two and a half years have been difficult, but everything that costs in life is worth it and it is something that nobody gets afterwards: finish the university, have your own house, let your children grow up happy; all that requires an effort. And to govern a country is similar, it costs, but the answer, the reward is to get it to change seriously for the good of all.
This crisis is not one more, it has to be the last. And know that you will not find me on the side of those who by proxy or money mortgage the future of the country; they will not find me on the side of those who speculate thinking about the next election: they will find me on the side of those who leave their lives for you.
For me it is not easy, I want you to know that these were the worst five months of my life after my abduction, but even for a minute I stopped doing what I could to face what we are living with, because I know that the greatest effort, the greatest effort is what each of you and your families are doing; is what they do when they get up and see that the situation is difficult, that the pocket tightens, that things cost a lot. On top of those who oppose change foretell chaos to generate fear and we renounce this profound change. That's why more than ever we have to keep moving forward together, with the determination that we can.
I have the necessary strength and I am here for you, but I need you more convinced than ever before the preachers of fear; I need you to face them with conviction, with joy, with hope. To change is to grow, and to grow is to face the difficulties that are sometimes immense and frightening. But you know what? The last word we have, we Argentines who are tired of a past that should not return. Change involves facing those who resist change, because change means that there are no more privileges, that we all have to make the same effort, have the same respect for each other, know how to listen and know how to contribute. And I know that we Argentines have enough capacity to achieve this change, we Argentines want our country to be more, much more than a collection of scandalous notebooks.
Maybe this is the last chance we have for the truth to come to light. And we have to live in the 21st century which is a century full of challenges, full of conflicts, but there is a great opportunity for Argentines if we are able to mature and accept the tasks that we have pending many years ago. I still believe without hesitation that we have everything to get ahead, absolutely everything.
Thank you very much.
