The worst is over and now come the years when we are going to grow. The transformations that we made begin to bear fruit, to feel. Like that family that had neither water nor sewage and now has them.
If nothing had changed, we would be like another brother country that is in a social disintegration. Therefore, we choose the path of change with gradualism, where all Argentines are united by effort.
A State at the service of the people is also a transparent State, showing how it spends its money and that it has officials forced to have a high ethical standard. In these two years, officials set limits as never before, to ensure that we are not here to benefit.
After decades of disorder, it was time to be serious about fiscal balance. It is the silver of the Argentines. Manage it responsibly is our obligation.
We are experiencing a mortgage credit boom. 2017 was the year with the most credits. Tens of thousands of families bought their houses with lower fees than the rent they paid.
Inflation in 2017 was lower than in 2016. We do not want to just lower it. We want to never again be an instrument of politics, as it has been for more than 70 years. Inflation punishes the majority, hampers competition and keeps us imprisoned in the short term.
In these two years we have advanced a lot together. We achieve agreements that generate employment and bring new opportunities to new parts of the country. Thanks to this, unemployment is falling and the total number of registered workers increased by almost 270 thousand.
We can not allow a woman to earn less than a man. It's not fair. Not well. This can not continue like this, they have my commitment so that the egalitarian salary established by our laws becomes a reality.
There is no reason for parents to share the time of birth of our children just two days. We know how important it is to be in family these days, so we are going to present a bill to extend paternity leave.
A revolution with tourism is coming. Last year we broke many records together (...) Never before have operated so many travelers in hotels in the country. And never before have so many people traveled on cabotage flights like now. We had more than 50 million trips within the country and we received more than 6 million tourists from other parts of the world.
Argentines have to build a culture of service so that each person who visits us falls in love with our country and wants to return again and again. Let us transform our kindness into concrete opportunities that multiply in towns and cities.
In these two years, we accelerated the growth of the federal fiber optic network, which already has more than 32 thousand kilometers and connects more than 400 localities that were previously disconnected.
The public space is, without doubt, the most democratic space we have. For the first time in many years, we are expanding the surfaces of national parks and we are improving the infrastructure we already had.
Today I want to tell you that we have decided to preserve an important part of Campo de Mayo and transform it into a National Park. It will be one of the largest urban national parks in the world and part of the protected area system of the metropolitan area.
We believe that in these years of democracy a tension between democracy and security persists. We do not believe that we have to fall into the iron hand and abolitionism to solve it. We believe in a system that puts the victims of crime at the center. Respect the security forces and offer penalties proportional to the crimes committed.
We want to feel cared for and for that we also have to think about those who take care of us. The women and men of the security forces are risking their lives for us and deserve all our respect and admiration.
Security and the fight against drug trafficking are two of the biggest demands of Argentines. For the first time, we have a national strategy to address these issues and we are taking care of the State where only the power of the bands existed.
The seizures of drugs are record: 300 tons. The number of robberies was reduced by 11 percent and homicides by 20 percent in these two years. It is important that we advance in the extension of ownership and that the State recover the assets of drug trafficking and organized crime.
Only if we know in real time where and why an accident happened (of transit), we will be able to do something to prevent it from happening again. We have to measure and evaluate, so with the help of the provinces we created a digital system that allows us to access this crucial information.
We have to work for educational equality, so that all children, especially the most vulnerable, can access quality education.
We need to be able to know how the school where our children are going is going. Today it is forbidden by Law to publish the results by school and that does not make sense. That is why I am asking you this legislative year to move forward to change this norm. What we need to fear is that the boys do not finish school. We can not do politics with the education of our children. We can not remember education only at the time of the paritarias.Every year, more than 100 thousand girls under the age of 19 get pregnant and seven out of ten of these pregnancies are not intentional. The lives of these young women change forever, many leave school and that affects their chances of getting a job and developing a life project. Sex education is a tool that empowers young people. 35 years ago we have been postponing a very sensitive debate, which as a society we owe: abortion. As I said more than once, I am in favor of life, but I am also in favor of mature and responsible debates, which as Argentines we have to give ourselves. For this reason, we are pleased that Congress includes this topic as an agenda for this year. I hope that all the voices are heard and all the positions are taken into account. The investment increases. Last year it grew 11 percent. And that investment is precisely the one that guarantees that we will continue growing because it enlarges our capacity to produce. This January we had record sales in cement, asphalt, cars, used cars, motorcycles, tourism, passenger flights. We already surpassed the number of people employed in 2015 and wages beat inflation. Construction is one of the sectors that is growing the most. We are in the right direction. Leaving behind many years of stagnation and regression. Argentines are maturing. We realized that it is no use to continue blaming others for what happens to us. What to grow depends on us, on our ability to sit down to talk at a table, without patoterism or extortion. If we could sit down to talk and avoid a crisis that was coming, if we could generate work and start to reduce poverty, if We were able to pave whole neighborhoods that were submerged in mud, if we could go from isolation to integration with the world, imagine the things that we will be able to do in the future. A year ago in this place I told them that we had to build the bases so that Argentina could grow 20 years consecutively. That's what we did, that invisible growth happened. It's like when we started a building: in the well you can not see what we're doing, but that foundation exists, is there and the rest is built on it. This is what is happening, the Argentines begin to see the fruits of that. And every transformation is made on firm foundations and will last for life. We need some reforms like the one in the Penal Code. We have an old code, messy and patched a thousand times. Since last year, a commission of experts has been working and we hope that they will propose a new code in a few months. A reform of the Code of Criminal Procedure is also necessary. The center of the reform is to move from the current model where judges investigate and decide, to a faster and oral one in which prosecutors have more prominence.
